Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this video
we're gonna have a bit of a disruptive view of
big number arithmetic sometimes there is nothing
better to bring us down to earth and let us let
go of these various dreamings having to do with
infinite sets and overconfidence about things
that are beyond the hill by just concentrating
on what we actually can write down and the
consequences of looking at the boundaries the
farthest extents that we can find in our actual
field of vision so it's commonly asserted that the
20th century mathematics was really the first to
have understood the infinite that that previous
eons of uncertainty about infinite this and if
that were dispelled by the 20th century rigor and
that the infinite took some kind of central stage
in modern mathematics this is a very commonly
expressed view I think it's a lot of bunk ok so
this is not true ok it's a it's a fantasy it's
wishful thinking it's a consequence of unclear
definitions and dubious logic the reality is
that 20th century mathematics really weakened
itself dramatically by refusing to clarify clearly
what was going on with so called infinite things
it was just willing to accept these kinds of
reasonings even if they could not be put on a
solid foundation it was really a case of wishful
thinking so no one understands the infinite and no
one has even defined the infinite properly in
the context that people usually like to think
about it's a question of definition ultimately
so the antidote as far as I'm concerned to these
kind of wofully thinking that characterizes
a lot of 20th century mathematics is a little
bit of a healthy dose of big numbers looking at
what we can actually do that's what we're gonna
do today so we have already talked about extremely
big numbers earlier in this video series back in
math foundation 17 and at that time I introduced
rather briefly these sort of higher multiplication
operators star 1 which is multiplication star
2 which is exponentiation and star 3 which one
might call some kind of triangular power operation
that that video I think was maybe a little bit too
advanced those concepts were maybe a little
bit too advanced for that video today I want
to have a more direct but more in-depth view
at sort of bigger numbers without the level of
abstraction that these higher or hyper operations
necessarily in bulk so in our next video we are
going to look at the idea of complexity and
then we'll touch base again with this little
bit more sophisticated approach to big numbers
so let's start out rather naively and let's say
let's try to create some big numbers so if we
go back to our very first video when we talked
about what natural numbers actually are at least
some possibilities for them we saw that one sort
of naive way of thinking about a natural number
was just as a bunch of marks bunch of strokes on
a page perhaps or little crosses on a piece of
bark or something like that so that a primitive
person maybe a hundred thousand years ago might
register something like this as recording some
quantity somewhere maybe a number of antelope at
a waterhole and they might count something like
this so saying well it's 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 thirdly
so that's already a pretty big dumper if you're
a primitive person about a hundred thousand years
ago that would be a big number and it'd be sort
of hard to fathom what was going on to that number
you know the difference between taking that number
and removing one or two it's hard to determine it
ok now moving up several hundreds of thousands of
years perhaps to the math foundation 6 where we
get to the hindu-arabic system that we use for
talking about numbers we can write down much
bigger numbers with this hindu-arabic formation
and we could read this as they started here see
the sort of ones and thousands millions billions
trillions quadrillions perhaps so 978 quadrillion
346 trillion 210 billion 16 million four hundred
ninety nine thousand one hundred seventy five
so that's quite a big number so this method
of writing down numbers as hindu-arabic form is a
lot more powerful than our primitive kind of form
but it's a lot more sophisticated as well then
going up one step we can employ exponents so we
can write things like this is going a little bit
beyond the traditional hindu-arabic form so this
is ten to the hundred a number which is actually
called a Google that name was introduced in the
1930s I believe by young boy he was a son of a
mad dishin who math just asked him what should we
call this number and the boy said aw let's call
it on Google that name somehow stuck notice the
different spelling from the usual google ok and
here is what this number P looks like if we sort
of rind out to give you a sense of how big it
is there's one followed by a hundred zeros and
you can see this is a lot bigger number than this
one and in fact this way of writing things allows
us to very quickly write a lot bigger numbers if
we added another zero just there then I'd have to
replace as a string of 100 zeros with a thousand
zeros so a lot more work so just a little bit more
effort there gives you a vastly bigger number
so this is a step up in terms of moving up the
ladder of getting bigger and bigger numbers to
a Google so if we want to ascend further in this
direction we can cook up bigger numbers by jacking
up towers of exponents so for example there's our
Google ten to the hundred that of course can also
be written as ten to the ten squared it's the way
we an exponent but 10 squared is read first and
then that's the exponent that we raise 10 to so
we could up the ante here by replacing this to
say with a 10 giving us 10 to the 10 to the 10
let's call it Q and since 10 to the 10 is 10
billion we could also write it like this so
this is 1 followed by 10 billion zeroes it's
a very big number and then we'd go further so
here's our 10 to the 10 to the hundred this is
10 to that number P up here so this is called
a googolplex that's a googol this is a googolplex
so a googolplex consists of 1 followed by a Google
number of zeros and then we could go further we
could say look at this U which is an interesting
number 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 and so we
have a power of exponents one on top of the other
back to four tens we could write this perhaps in
another way so 10 triangle for introduce hyper
operation to denote this idea of stacking tens
on top of tens we'll have a look later and see
that this number is somehow commenced Irbil with
the rough size of the universe very roughly so
and then of course we can go further so here is a
number which has figured occasionally a few of my
talks I call it Z which is 10 to the 10 to the 10
to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10
to the 10 to the 10 plus 23 so using this triangle
notation this is 10 triangle 10 plus 23 and this
number has figured in my famous math problems one
lecture and also in my debate with James Franklin
we were talking about infinity and doesn't exist
so this is a very very big number and this way
of writing it is very efficient it's a huge
number it's a I mean it's a humongous number
it's almost impossible for us to really get any
kind of realistic sense for how big this number
this is all a number here is already very vast
this number is much much bigger than this but you
know at some point we just have to rely on these
adjectives and saying well this is vastly bigger
than that this is a you know super humongously
more gigantic than this one etc etc but there's
not a lot of things in our universe or things
that scale in some kind of way where a number
like this or a number like this really tells us
something realistic about some configuration so
it's beyond our conceptual ability by and large
but of course we can go much further than this
well once we have this idea of stacking numbers on
top of each other in towers and Exponential's then
we can exploit the size of these towers as another
ingredient that we have control over and I want
to illustrate that in a sort of rather direct way
with so without any sophisticated hyper operations
just sort of directly using some pictures how we
can reasonably easily get big numbers but also
to get you used to the idea that no matter what
perhaps impressive-looking scheme somebody has for
creating larger and larger numbers it's not too
hard once you've mastered that particular point of
view to see how to go beyond it to go to another
level to go to a higher level so there's always
a higher level that one can get to we can always
transcend any particular technology for producing
bigger and bigger numbers so let's illustrate
this with just some big number so here is 10 to
the 10 to the 10 so here's a tower of tens and how
many are in this tower well of course every time
I raise this level of this tower just by one its
enormous ly increasing the number so if I you know
put another one on top of here then basically what
I'm doing is I'm taking the one that I just had
and raising ten to that power that dramatically
improvement so how many are in that tower there
well there might be 10 in that well maybe there
are 10 to the 10 in that tower that makes it even
much much bigger than it was before in fact we can
agree that the number in this tower is itself some
humongous number so the number of levels in this
tower of Exponential's now is controlled by this
huge number okay this huge number is telling us
that there's a vast number of levels each one of
these levels has a enormous a humongous effect on
increasing the size of the number we're talking
about and how many are there in this level well
that's something else that we have control over
we could say make that 10 might as well make that
10 to the 10 and so on so we can have another
tower of tens controlling this tower of tens and
this tower of tens controls this tower of tens all
right so we could keep going like this in fact
we could go a certain number of times until we
get to 10 to the 10 all up to the 10 and then it
finally eventually perhaps we stop because we're
getting tired so now we have a situation where we
have each of these brackets controlling the number
in the previous Tower and now there's a sort of
a variable number of brackets we haven't said how
many brackets we had here or how many towers of
tens there are altogether here so we can introduce
another kind of number here so we can sort of
transcend the idea of just keeping on extending
here by now saying well why don't we just agree
that there are 10 brackets maybe of 10 towers here
okay there's one tower two towers three towers
and it's called at the tenth tower well why ten
is rather modest how about 210 to the tenth now
there's ten billion of these towers arranged in
a row and no no we just upped the ante quite a
lot now there's this vast number of such towers
in that first row now you can see where I'm going
to go I'm going to up this number here in the same
kind of way that I just did over there so we're
gonna have the same kind of story here where we
end up with a similar kind of tower system where
this tower system controls the size of our system
okay and how many are in this tower system
how many towers of tens do we have here well
altogether we have another configuration and I'm
just going to put three dots and so we'll go down
to the last kind of row which looks like this all
the way up to 10 and let's agree that the number
of that number of towers of 10 there are 10 all
right so we have different levels of braces here
we have these brackets going in this direction
and then these braces telling us how many are
in the previous towers of brackets and then there
are braces that are telling us how many there are
in the previous level of braces and so on and so
now there's a question of our possibility of going
you know in another sort of direction counting
the number of Grace's that there are now in this
vertical Tower of braces so I haven't told you
how many sort of levels there are here in this
first level second level you know enth level down
to that 10 so how many levels are there here if I
should do this in a different color okay so now
there's a certain number of levels there and now
you can see that I'm now in a position of putting
something over here okay I'm just going to put 10
there being very modest okay but an all speaking I
don't have a lot of room but if I had a little bit
more room okay well then I could bump this number
up and I could have a whole new kind of business
like this and you can see that I could probably
start creating new bigger brackets going in this
direction so we could if we had a very very big
page and some patience and some motivation you
could see that you could start creating these
huge numbers with braces and brackets going in
different directions and that sort of employing
different levels so that at one level you kick
in a whole new infrastructure to deter all the
previous level alright so this is a very big
number let's add 23 to the whole thing okay so
the whole that whole number plus 23 and let's
give it a name let's call it so Z Prime alright
Zed prime is this whole number here this Tower
of towers of towers plus 23 and this and then a
much bigger number than just ordinary modest Zed
that we were talking about a little while ago and
it illustrates it really illustrates that there's
an air of unreality here right even if we try to
imagine what's the significance of of this number
and what does it count well it's all completely
impossible really for us to come up with any kind
of reasonable object for which this is counting
but this is something that we can write down
and and we can point to it and say this is a
number all right but already there's perhaps
some possible debate here right I mean maybe some
of you are reluctant to call this our number first
of all there are lots of three dots around but I
could say that well I could actually you know that
everything is in principle finite even if it's
practically impossible to write these things down
but some of you might just object anyway that
this is maybe going beyond the bounds of what
a number should be but maybe not okay so anyway
there's at least some possibility of questioning
to what extent we're going to allow wilder and
Wilder constructs to still be in the family of
numbers that were willing to consider alright
so that Z prime was a very very big number yes
but it's possible to go much further and in a
few more videos I'm going to show you how to be
a little bit more sophisticated and write down
numbers which are vastly bigger than even said
Prime but what I want to do now is talk a little
bit about the consequences of thinking about these
bigger numbers ok so there's some interesting
consequences and one of the first is to start to
realize that arithmetic with big numbers becomes
first of all very hard and then it becomes vacuous
or perhaps impossible rather quickly let me
illustrate that with this arithmetic aproblem
ok so here is a problem of arithmetic which is
an analogue of the problem what is 51 plus 179
so that problem we can all work out let's say we
want to work out what this is so this is 9 to the
9 up to the 9 and there's a tower of 9 9 so it's
a relatively modest thing by the considerations of
said prime but it's still a humungous a big number
and we're adding to it the number 8 - the 8 all
the way up to the age where there are 8 in this
tower so let's ask ourselves the question what is
the result of adding this number with this number
so we write down what the answer is well I'm gonna
write down the best answer that I have ok and my
best answer is 9 to the 9 to the 9 where there
there's altogether 9 there plus 8 to the 8 all the
way up to the 8th to the 8 whether it's altogether
8 in that tower in other words my best answer
to this arithmetic Allah is to simply repeat the
question back as an answer and I think most of us
will agree that that's an unsatisfactory kind of
arithmetic if were training our young people to
learn arithmetic with integers or with fractions
and the best that they could do was repeat the
questions back to us what is 7 plus 5 it's 7
plus 5 and what's 8 times 9 it's 8 times 9 right
if this is what learning arithmetic means we would
all agree that this is a completely vacuous and
a waste of time but I remind you this is a very
familiar kind of arithmetic even amongst my fellow
mathematicians ok there's a challenge that you've
heard me say probably quite a few times so far to
my fellow mathematician friends who like to still
believe in real numbers so you know real numbers
are those wishful dreaming kinds of things that
people like to think about in the 20th century
because it made them feel good about analysis
even though they weren't actually connected with
computational reality and they operated with these
real numbers basically just by talking and so you
rarely ever get them to actually make computations
and if you do ask them to make an arithmetic
accommodation they quickly run and have something
else to do so many advocates of real number
arithmetic seem to be let's say not too keen
on rising to the following challenge I say let's
calculate say pi plus e plus root 2 right here
arguably the three most common irrational numbers
let's demonstrate that we could do a little bit
of a real number arithmetic by adding them up and
finding out what we actually get this is like the
real number arithmetic analog of asking somebody
who's learning about rational numbers what is 1/2
plus 1/3 plus 1/5 what's 1/2 plus 1/3 plus 1/5
hang on let's do this ok common denominator 2
times 3 times 5 30 how many 30 is no there gonna
be 15 plus 10 plus 6 15 plus 10 plus 6 that's 31
there's the answer 1/2 plus 1/3 plus 1/5 equals
31 over 30 let me just check that that's right 15
plus 10 is 25 plus 6 is 31 yes and I'm gonna
circle the answer there we go we have circle
the answer we have made the computation we have
written down the answer we have circled it and
I can point to it and I can ask you to verify it
thousands of people can make this calculation they
will all come up with this what happens when
we give the real number enthusiasts exactly a
corresponding challenge well of course they all
have something better to do but if you actually
got them to sit down and say well look write down
something right then almost all of them would
write down this circle it real number enthusiasts
are there any of you out there that would write
down something different than that please show us
what it is I'd be very interested so real number
arithmetic is completely or almost completely
vacuous because when you actually want to actually
make calculations as opposed to actually talking
about them you're inevitably faced with situations
like this which is the reason why examples in real
number or arithmetic and analysis never actually
or rarely ever get to the bottom of things
because if you get to the bottom of things
with real examples you end up with embarrassments
like this okay so we can see that the same kind
of vacuity of a real number arithmetic is going
to be happening here with very big numbers we're
going to be moving in this direction where we've
got numbers that are so big that although we can
talk about the arithmetic with them we can't
actually do the arithmetic with them except in
a kind of tautological fashion like this so this
is very disconcerting all right the idea that the
confident abilities that we have for very small
numbers start to thin out and fade and eventually
disappear as we get two really really big numbers
that basically were in the same hopeless position
that our real number friends are when they try
to do actual arithmetic so another potentially
disturbing consequence of thinking about big
numbers is that you start to realize that you
lose induction as a proof technique so we haven't
talked about mathematical induction but it is a
standard way of trying to prove things about
natural numbers and the idea is that you prove
a statement first for the number one having done
that then you look in a more general situation and
you look at the statement for an arbitrary number
n and you try to assume that and then prove that
it's true for n plus 1 okay so if you've managed
to do that and you've proven it initially for 1
then this argument is deemed sufficient to then
prove it for any N or for all and for those people
who like to think in terms of all natural numbers
now there's a little bit of a problem with this
proof technique I hate to say ok and the problem
is illustrated already at this reasonably modest
level of just Zed so not anywhere near that prime
just up to Zed the problem is that you can't count
by ones twos and you can count to ten billion
you can maybe count to ten trillion you can get
your computer to count further but neither you
nor your computer and or anything else will be
able to count by one's to this number when we're
going from 1 to this number we're leapfrogging the
operation of the successor by this trick of having
towers of exponents so this is like a little bit
like the analogy of you know somebody who walks
likes to walk a lot and it's interesting exploring
the world around them and you compare what that
person can do with somebody else who flies than
the airplane to various buses ok so it's not true
that the person who insists on walking can explore
and discover the same things that the person who
flies does there's really a fundamental difference
even though they're both sort of traveling
ok so that's what's happening here that with
this exponentiation we're able to leapfrog and
transverse areas that ordinary County can't do and
the reason why we can't count up to this number
is because most of the numbers between 1 and that
cannot be written down in our universe they are
so vast in terms of writing them down that they
literally cannot be written down in any fashion
whatsoever using any system now we're going to
talk a little bit more about that so that's a
very interesting point that was related to this
complexity that we're talking about next time but
this is true and it's a very disconcerting so it
means that you know strictly speaking induction
proofs are highly debatable or questionable once
we start to try to push them up to numbers like
this so in fact many theorems of number theory
start to look very shaky even famous theorems once
we move beyond the realm of sort of familiar or
reasonably small numbers to these super humongous
numbers this is very disconcerting and we're gonna
have to say quite a few more things about this but
it really turns out that a lot of famous theorems
of number theory are not really true in as great
generality as people would like to think they are
just the way the world is and we start to see a
little bit of that I think with this just playing
around with the reasonably big numbers and a third
consequence of this kind of thinking one that's
very important for our discussion of set theory
and types of data structures that really explains
why I'm so focused on having everything concrete
and precise and finite and write down able is the
realization that once we start to understand and
think about really big numbers more our confidence
in writing down some statement like this that n is
the set of natural numbers 1 comma 2 comma 3 comma
and so on is much diminished let's say somewhat
diminished to be polite ok so this is so common
in modern 20th century mathematics and this is a
very glib kind of statement where the complexity
that's squeezed in here in these three dots is
just absolutely mind-boggling okay but you don't
see the mind-boggling aspect if you're only gonna
go up to a certain small amount you know he count
to ten or the twenty or to three thousand they
all seem very uniform things seem very pedestrian
one at a time etc etc but it's only when we start
to make these bigger jumps to these bigger bigger
in numbers and start to realize that we have
to take big jumps to get to these bigger and
bigger numbers we have to fly over vast terrains
of numbers which are lost to us that we start to
realize that the uniformity the seeming uniformity
of this sequence is an illusion it's not that way
at all the natural numbers are not some steady
progression that just march pleasantly and
uniformly off to infinity that's not what they're
like at all okay the role the the nature of the
natural numbers from the beginning end of things
is so dramatically different from what it looks
like once you get up to the kinds of numbers we've
been talking about today just like night and day
okay becomes chaotic it becomes fractal like they
become higher than all kinds of logical problems
and and problems about complexity that that appear
that are just not visible at this naive level
and finally there's certain other natural
questions that arise in particular one starts to
ask oneself well I wonder what exactly a natural
number is anyway I mean what do we actually mean
by a natural number this question of should we
allow numbers like Z prime that number that I
wrote with all those brackets and braces and dots
representing stuff that perhaps theoretically we
could do although in practice we're not able to
actually do all those to count as natural numbers
or should we be more restrictive should we just
restrict ourselves to say hindu-arabic numbers
or maybe even to just Neanderthal inscriptions
of lots of marks on a piece of bark so there
is a question about try to identify different
types or complexity levels of numbers to try to
get a better sense of you know what actually we
should be considering when we consider natural
numbers so the whole topic it becomes much more
interesting and complicated so we are going to
talk more about this kind of big numbers in fact
I'm going to show you in a few more videos some of
us and even more dramatic ways of getting a lot
bigger numbers but what we want to move now is
to really understand this notion of complexity a
little bit more clearly the notion of complexity
sheds a lot of light on what's really going on
here and helps us in clarifying how we should
think about a lot of these questions all
right so that's what we're gonna do in our
next video I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening